---
layout: post
title: "A Culturally Relativist Worldcup"
permalink: /worldcup
---


[![Opening image](https://substack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com/public/images/78841091-3f91-430a-a67d-661dcb56c555_1200x675.jpeg)](https://substack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com/public/images/78841091-3f91-430a-a67d-661dcb56c555_1200x675.jpeg)


### The Human Rights Discourse during the Qatar World Cup

So I had this whole plan set up so that when the 2022 World Cup opening ceremony begins on the TV, I'd have my seitan double burger and fries on the plate (yes, seitan, yes vegan, yes I know the jokes, and yes it tastes good if you season like you mean it), and the private agreement with myself that for two hours I would live in a trivial universe. I, along with my other Qatari countreymen, have waited for this moment for more than a decade....but then the universe, which in this case wore a BBC logo, decided to schedule a seminar. Cut to a panel of talking heads explaining my country to me. Human rights, migrant workers, stadiums, gay people, the familiar reel of statistics with grayscale B-roll.

I am without hedging, pro-human rights (I must, nevertheless, hedge that the phrase needs to be properly cashed out). I want the pressure. I want the guardianship rules interrogated and the old kefala logics retired and not in name only. Part of me watched the sudden moral attention like a citizen opening the windows during a dust storm, because even bad air can clear a room. Let the cracks show. Let the state feel watched. Let the conversation grow teeth (Let it go, let it gooooo?).

Then the broadcast kept going and the feeling shifted. It was the choreography of it. The way “human rights abuses” slid out like a password instead of a sentence. The confident flattening of an entire region into a single lecture slide, the exotic villain placed helpfully centre stage so the West could perform judge and jury without ever glancing at its own reflection. The critique I agree with on paper started to smell like theatre. The moral of the story arrived pre-printed and my country was presented mainly as a prop of an Eastern barbarism that still maintains a medieval practice of indentured slavery and the repression of latent sexual identities which the West liberated. It reminded me of those colonial museum rooms with glass cases full of confiscated objects and explanatory plaques about “civilising missions”.

I kept saying to myself that the substance is right. The kefala system extracted too much from people who had too little and that persecuting anyone for their consented, harmless adult sex acts is indefensible. These sentences still stand. Yet style matters because style tells you who the audience is. The coverage spoke to an audience that already agreed, a monologue about a projected Other instead of a dialogue. Which means it was never going to persuade those who most needed persuading, and it was never going to reach those of us sitting in the uneasy middle space, both proud and critical, both attached and angry. It certainly was not going to move anyone with actual power, because people with power do not respond to televised shaming so much as to costs, coalitions and stories that alter what their supporters think is respectable. It's the rhetorical equivalent of posting a black square on Instagram and calling it activism. The subtext was that of a hierarchy of civilised versus backward, the same old Orientalism that's painted this region as a project for Western salvation since the 19th century.

The final whistle blew and the moral weather changed overnight. One moment the feed was full of think-pieces and grave voices; the next moment we were back to transfer rumours and compilation videos of stepovers set to nostalgic music. As if the outrage had been a seasonal décor item. As if the point was less justice than a brief vacation to the east wing of the Empire of Concern, where you can tut at the barbaric exhibit, collect a passport stamp that says “spoke up,” and head to the food court. The stadiums fell quiet. The hashtags cooled. People like me, who live with the consequences long after the cameras pack away their cords, were left wondering who that performance had actually been for.

None of this means human rights language is useless. It means the way it travels often strips it of voltage. I wrote elsewhere about the rationalist tone that floats above lived life. The declarative “X is a human right” feels clean to say, but it rarely converts the unconvinced. If you wanted to persuade my uncle who still thinks kefala is “basically fine if enforced properly,” you would have to work differently. You would sit with a migrant and let him describe the debt he carried before he even boarded the plane, or the way his passport lived in someone else’s drawer for two years, and you would let my uncle hear how small a person can feel when their name is present only as a file number. That kind of rhetoric is slow and local. 

British broadcasters, on that night, addressed a Britain that already nodded along. I nodded too. I nodded and still felt spoken over. That split feeling stayed with me, that I agreed with the claims and mistrusted the staging, I wanted reform and wanted a football match, I felt indicted and condescended to at once. Maybe that is the immigrant-at-home and citizen-abroad experience in miniature, or maybe it is just what happens when a global event turns your backyard into someone else’s lesson plan.

### Was it a Clash of Civilisations?

The rhetoric did far worse than not persuade anyone who needed convincing. The larger rhetoric around human rights seemed to have triggered an effectively anti-human rights reaction from many Qataris, if only out of spite. A moral panic among
Qataris ensued about the infiltration of sexual minorities into Qatar,
as if none already existed. Suddenly, rainbows were public enemy number
one, feared as if they were some sort of demonic gateway for an invasion
of gay zombies. And charges of orientalism, western exceptionalism,
cultural imperialism and hypocrisy were the main rhetorical weapons in Qatar's toolkit. The discourse descended into a pantomime
of East vs. West, each side essentialising the other.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><a href="https://twitter.com/qatari/status/1597323062743293955"></a></blockquote>

[![image](https://substack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com/public/images/2e034920-916b-4d3a-8450-ae63b9fa00ce_1080x1350.jpeg)](https://substack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com/public/images/2e034920-916b-4d3a-8450-ae63b9fa00ce_1080x1350.jpeg)

And then, low and behold, I saw it again, out in the distance. Samuel Huntington's ghost popped up on the screen screaming: 'BEHOLD! the Clash of Civilizations I had predicted decades ago!' Okay that didn't actually happen, but his theory *was* suddenly trending again, and not in a good way. His ghost must have anyway been chuckling in his grave, seeing his belligerent theory come to life about the so-called clash of monolithic entities, 'Islam vs the West'. "The great divisions among human kind and the dominating source of conflict," wrote Huntington, "will be
cultural . . . the clash of civilizations will dominate global politics.
The fault lines between civilizations will be the battle lines of the
future." 

Superficially, it seemed to have been instantiated and Huntington vindicated. I watched as scenes of Qatari imams went on evangelising rampages handing out  flyers to foreign football fans, Muslims in Rohingya lifting portraits of MBS and cheering for Saudi Arabia's national team, tournament officials confiscating rainbow flags, Palestine armbands being turned into anti-LGBT symbols, a talk of sports teams as colonisers and colonised, the German national team gesturing protests about LGBT persecution. Islam as the last standing unyielding "Other", the West as missionary of progress, both trapped in a feedback loop of mutual provocation. In none of this did the the lived realities of migrant workers, women, and queers rendered visible, they were simply casualties of a rhetorical war waged
between two hegemonic narratives.

 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><a href="https://twitter.com/tariqpanja/status/1595786945757593602"></a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><a href="https://twitter.com/BrasilEdition/status/1595074157439602693"></a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><a href="https://twitter.com/Justin_D_Martin/status/1594757374279041038"></a></blockquote>

**The Gay International** 
As I watched the madness unfold, I couldn't help but think of these
totalising, grand stories that began circulating in the 90's about such
supposed civilisational clashes, about uncommunicating communities and moral and cultural incommensurablites and so on. Whether or not we\'re starring in some cosmic civilisational showdown (I\'m leaning towards \"not\"), there\'s no denying our world is a patchwork of different culturally-rooted perspectives. But the World Cup
laid bare not exactly a clash of civilisations, but a crisis of translation, mainly as a result of a failure to set the conditions for a fruitful social negotiation
about our 'global village' (and the global events that are held within
it). In this particular case, journalists and commentators to government
officials and football audiences, all were largely convergent on their
confusion about what 'human rights' are and how to go pragmatically
negotiate them.

When Western NGOs and broadcasters demand that Qatar “reform,” they smuggle in a teleology of progress that crowns their own moral vocabulary as civilization’s endpoint. As Joseph Massad had argued decades ago, the debate that follows rarely concerns desire or conduct in any concrete sense. It concerns the epistemology of sex, the taxonomies that classify practices and persons, and the scope of identity in relation to nation, culture and religion. Predictable defiance meets that script and hardens into paranoia because the argument arrives as civilizational ranking rather than persuasion. It is helpful here to focus for a moment on the 2022 world cup moral outrage over alleged abuses of LGBT people who desire to be recognised, much less liberated. 

For a long time, same-sex relations in the Gulf lived outside official discourse, tolerated in private, discussed obliquely in schools and social circles, structured by practice rather than identity. It was a famously a regular phenomenon in schools and even among my own classmates. Obviously this was not a European regime of bourgeois monogamous marriage...but one wonders, must it be?? Are sexual categories a-historic, pre-discursive, universal categories or historically conditioned constructs?  None of my classmates identified as a particular sexual category, and I don't believe for a second that they were simply conceptually impoverished in some way; that they did not "have" the conceptual/linguistic  toolkit to express this latent need for recognition of a sexual identity ("having" a concept seems like an absurd notion itself). Many of them are happily married to women today! The Western 'Gay International' would call them 'closeted', where the closet trope functions as a source of possible certain knowledge, in which, behind its closed door, lies a truth waiting to be revealed, a enlightenment binary of knowledge/ignorance, so that 'coming out' requires adopting specific discursive sexual and gender categories and speaking in particular ways about one’s erotic experiences, relations and desires. As Foucault had understood, the so-called science of sexuality legitimises the patronising idea that the truths it reveals are unknown to the individuals themselves. That these men may simply practice sex acts on other men and not "be" gay (not "have" such an identification or self-declare it) is never interrogated by Western audiences. 

So must the entire world adopt the epistemological and ontological notions of sex acts that the West promulgates, which is now ensconced ipso facto into the prevailing global discourse on human rights? Though colonial encounter and imported capital and its sponsorship of what came to be known later as “modernization” projects certainly did reshape norms and sensibilities in the Arab world. But they did not install a universal European heterosexual regime. Uptake clustered among elites and a Westernized middle stratum, the milieu from which the media sometimes draws its most fluent interlocutors. Some men in these circles have adopted Western identity labels, often as part of a broader package of aspirational Western styles. They remain a small minority when set against the many men who engage in same-sex relations without identifying as “gay” or seeking gay politics.

Authors documented how much of nineteenth-century colonial projects assimilated Islamic jurisprudential permissiveness on contraception and, at times, abortion, to Victorian Christian strictures, a reversal that unsettles the myth of linear liberalisation.^1 Read through that history, the World Cup cycle of moral outrage in Doha looked like a familiar pedagogy, a missionary script that ranks cultures and demands conversion to a particular taxonomy of sex. Qatari society has been formed by anti-colonial memory and Arab media ecologies such as The Voice of the Arabs, and a present representation of Arab and Muslim cultures that predominate in the more 'enlightened' Euro-American Occident which still more mirrors the representations of the 19th century classical Orientalists. 

The effect is therefore far constrictive rather than liberatory. Same-sex relations in Qatar had largely remained outside state and journalistic discourse, and many practitioners preferred that discretion. The World Cup cycle of indignation incited a new, punitive conversation that framed Western media and human-rights NGOs as antagonists. As publicity intensified, enforcement shifted toward identity and visibility rather than private conduct where the targets became those who name themselves “gay” and seek collective presence in social or public settings. Private acts are difficult to police and often managed through silence but identity, once declared, is legible and sanctionable. The incitement thus installed an ontology of “gayness” within the emergent discourse, compressing prior ambiguities into a binary in which one either endorses or opposes “gay rights”, while the presuppositions of that package go unexamined. Within anticolonial nationalism, and within Islamism that seeks technological modernity while preserving cultural or religious authenticity, the campaign read as encroachment. The reliance of of this discourse on the institutions associated with U.S. 21st century imperialist power—the State Department, Congress, U.S.-based NGOs and media—only confirmed that reading. Young Qataris’ adoption of Palestinian armbands in response to European team protests against FIFA’s ban on political symbols, alongside silence on Israeli apartheid and mass violence, was an unsurprising rejoinder to selective empathy. By any practical measure, this sequence narrowed rather than expanded sexual freedom.

This is not to absolve Qatar, or any society, of its oppressions. The kefala system,
the persecution of queer bodies, the subjugation of women: these are not
'cultural differences' but violences to be dismantled everywhere,
including in the Euro-American world. To the Western gaze, the migrant
work is a victim of 'Qatari barbarism', a pawn in the NGO's narrative of
salvation. To the Qatari state, he is an economic actor, a temporary
guest enmeshed in a contract of mutual benefit. But what if we listened
to his narrative, to the dreams that propelled him from Dhaka to Doha,
the kinship networks that sustain him, the indignities he endures not as
a 'rights' violation abstractly defined, but as a rupture in his
understanding of dignity? And why is the conversation of the structural
issues always ignored? That of global capitalism where individuals are
compelled to migrate from their underdeveloped countries, exploited by
recruitment agencies in those countries, and made to accept low wages
simply to live. For that conversation to happen, the critical lens would
have to be turned inward, and the World Cup was a missed opportunity for
that, because we are extremely ill-equipped to even begin to name the
actual issues at hand.

This had been the main concern of this entry. For the rest, I will be in untangling the intellectual knots we\'ve tied ourselves into, the arguments and rejoinders utilised by both camps and how they are often mischaracterised. The conviction
which underpins the essay is that we must first seek a higher level of
critical self-understanding of the philosophical presuppositions we hold
as human rights advocates in order to engage with other populations in
good faith. I am specifically concerned with making explicit the
normative and metanormative understanding of human rights in the hopes
of unclouding mutual communication, at the very least on an intellectual
level.

### Cultural Boundaries are Chimeras

Meaningful cross-cultural communication cannot thrive in the stuffy
confines of the traditionalists\' cultural isolationism on the one hand,
and UNESCO\'s \"windowless\" cultural relativism on the other hand (as
cheekily dubbed by anthropologist Clifford Geertz, where human
communities are in his words "semantic monads"). To speak of cultural
boundaries as fixed, impermeable entities is to indulge in a fiction.
Cultures are palimpsests, they are always borrowing and fusing ideas,
food, fashion, and so on. One may go so far as saying, with Geertz, that
other cultures are constitutive of one another, that routes supervene on
roots. Static "natives", anchored in place and untouched by outside
contact have probably never existed outside the misguided writings of
meandering 20th century European anthropologists.

And so in that sense, in the words of philosopher Paul Feyerabend,
"potentially, every culture is all cultures." That is to stay that, at
the boundaries of cultures, you always find ambiguities, contradictions
and pluralities; you find people juggling their cultural identities,
whether it\'s me balancing my Qatari socialisation with my Western
education - moving in and out of different cultural prototypes, mixing
and matching - or gay and feminist Muslims navigating their faith,
gender and sexuality. People tolerate such ambiguity, and they settle
apparent contradictions by simply dissolving them. So if we accept that
boundaries are what they are as chimeras, we can start treating any
culture\'s practices as our own practice. Torture, for example, is an
offence regardless of the culture in which it occurs and not some
mysterious \"other cultural\" practice. And we\'ll always find local
voices condemning it, and those voices is where any sort of intervention
should begin.

This requires a humility alien to both the missionary and the nativist:
a willingness to see that the gay Muslim, the feminist imam, or the
Qatari liberal are not oxymorons. The promise of such an approach is not
consensus, but translation: the arduous, imperfect work of finding
equivalences across difference. When a Qatari woman demands autonomy
from male guardianship, she may couch her plea in the language of
Islamic equity rather than liberal feminism. But to dismiss her demand
because it invokes hadith rather than Hobbes is to privilege form over
substance. Conversely, when Western activists invoke "LGBTQ+ rights" in
Doha they may simultaneously conflate queer liberation with the
universalisation of Western identity categories.

As Joseph Massad showed, this activism doesn't just describe a struggle;
it prescribes one, insofar as it imposes the rigid binaries of
"closeted" versus "out," "heterosexual" versus "homosexual," onto
societies where same-sex desire has historically been organized
differently: not as identity, but as practice; not as a political
collective, but as a fluid social reality. To demand they "come out" in
the style of Stonewall is to demand they surrender their cultural
grammar to a foreign lexicon; it is to make them casualties of a "rescue
narrative" that serves the activist's savior complex more than the
actual needs of the oppressed, in just another empire singing "We Are
the World" while the marginalized write their anthems in the margins. It
becomes such that, when Qatar confiscates rainbow flags or bans
"political" armbands, it does so under the pretext of repelling foreign
interference---a pretext handed to them by the ham-fisted moralizing of
outsiders. The state's crackdown becomes a performance of "cultural
sovereignty," while local queer communities pay the price.

To translate across difference, we must ask: What does queer resistance
look like in their idiom? How does a feminist critique sound in their
register? In short, cultures, in the final analysis, are verbs, not
nouns. They are performed, not inherited. They are remade daily in the
choices of individual performances that have no qualms with apparent
contradictions of their moment, as contradictions imply cultures as
reified entities with boundaries.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><a href="https://twitter.com/qatari/status/1598420088285265920"></a></blockquote>

## Universalism vs. Relativism

In the human rights discourse, we find two teams on the playing field.
Bear in mind, we\'re painting with broad strokes here, but such
simplification is sometimes needed for analysis.

Team West features a motley crew of Western journalists, human rights
activists, liberals of all flavours, and mostly individuals from WEIRD
(acronym) populations who got over their bipartisanism to condemn the
other team. They\'re often found shouting from their moral high ground,
hurling phrases like \"X is a violation of human rights!\" as if
they\'re tossing confetti at a parade.

Team Qatar includes 'subaltern' petro-rich Qataris, PR-savvy social
media firms, aggrieved non-WEIRD audiences, postcolonial professors, and
FIFA. This team retorts by (understandably) throwing around accusations
of cultural imperialism, Western exceptionalism, and hypocrisy. Some go
on to then weaponise outdated liberal values like \"non-judgment\" to
legitimate illiberal practices and hush up dissenters. When it suits
them, they\'ll also cosy up to normative cultural relativism---a
prescription for tolerating the moral practices of other cultures no
matter how much they might disagree with them.

This was exemplified by the FIFA president's pre-tournament address to
the press when he claimed that the 'West' is being hypocritical when
criticising Qatar for the conditions it puts migrant workers and
exclaims that \"for what we Europeans have been doing for 3,000 years
around the world, we should be apologising for the next 3,000 years
before starting to give moral lessons to people\".

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><a href="https://twitter.com/binnahar85/status/1594764842220617728"></a></blockquote>


The retort made by the Qatar team, when assessed charitably, is intended
to be a sort of internal critique against the 'West' party, as no one in
the 'Qatar' team is sincerely a normative relativist. It was made
possible because 'the West' team was framed as holding two untenable
positions, though never explicitly defined. And when you don't
explicitly define your position, people will define it---and
mischaracterise it if that furthers their goals---for you. These
positions are as follows.

### Right above Culture (normative universalism):

On the one hand, human rights advocates, in wanting to make universal
prescriptions and "ground" (i.e., defend the philosophical position
behind) normative universalism and a universal procedural justice
system, they (in my view, mistakenly) affirm *metaethical* realism. The
latter is the view that there are moral facts (e.g. human rights) that
are not made true by anyone's stances. In the context of human rights,
that there are these 'natural' moral obligations which we might call
'rights' that come about simply in virtue of being a featherless biped,
and these moral obligations are made true independent of anything anyone
thinks about them---are not made the case by our perspectives.

Or to put it in terms of normative 'reasons', all individuals are
universally conferred with minimum moral obligations that cannot be
trampled by the interests of their culture or group. The justification
for these moral obligations is that they are backed up by
stance-independent normative reasons. So to say that there are human
rights against torturing babies for fun is to say that you have a
normative reason to not torture babies for fun. This relies on the idea
that there are reasons for action independent of our desires, attitudes,
beliefs, choices etc., as in you have a reason to not spend your life
counting spades of grass whether you like doing so or not. (See my
critique of this view
[here](https://alialmaadeed.substack.com/p/i-dont-care-about-the-moral-facts)).

### Right to Culture (normative relativism):

On the other hand, human rights advocates of whom Claud Levi-Strauss had
approvingly called 'UNESCO cosmopolitanists' affirm a naive *normative*
cultural relativism, a prescriptive position popularly held among early
20th century anthropologists which holds that we must tolerate the moral
practices of different cultures (principles of non-interference and
non-judgment). This is exemplified in UNESCO's *Our Creative Diversity*
1995 report which reiterates the tweet above in saying that cultures
deserve to be treated "with respect" (as if there's clearly bounded
'cultures' that are not further divisible into contradictory
subcultures), and frames the issue not as 'human rights vs culture' but
as 'a human right to culture', and then equivocates on the word
'culture' between 'a way of life' and 'an aesthetic work'. This 'respect
our culture' rhetoric is exactly the type of rhetoric which the Saudi
government in its treatment of women, nationalists in their demand for
stricter border controls, the genital mutilators in Somalia, the Islamic
State and ethnocentrists all over the world can all happily rejoice
with.

Taken together, the human rights advocates express the following
propositions:

> 1.  We hold that human rights norms are universally applicable, and
>     they are 'grounded' by stance-independent moral reasons.
>
> 2.  We ought not judge the moral norms of other cultures.

### Can't Have Your Cake and Eat it Too

Seting aside the metaethical point (i.e., the 'grounding' part), clearly
there is a contradiction here; human rights advocates are endorsing
normative universalism and normative relativism simultaneously. That is,
there are claiming that we ought to tolerate other individuals or groups
that act against human rights because such an act is a cultural act, and
that we ought not tolerate individuals or groups that act against human
rights irrespective of culture. Human rights advocates are thus framed
as moral schizophrenics and condemned as hypocrites for making two
contradicting normative claims. They can't have their cake and eat it
too; they can either affirm normative universalism or normative
relativism, buy not both at once.

I suggest that human rights advocates jettison normative cultural
relativism as there is no good reason to uphold a position which
precludes a capacity of moral indignation and contempt---or interference
if the situation so needs. It is antithetical to a 'human rights'
project.

Human rights, by their nature, involve universal prescriptive norms that
are insensitive to the cultural standards of the actant individual or
group. If Siberian Shamans had historically developed a ritual to kill
odd-ordered born babies for fun, then presumably, the human rights
project aims to in some sense interfere with that ritual. After all, the
*Universal* Declaration explicitly confers rights to individuals (the
odd-order babies), not groups (the Shamans). And all human rights start
off with some universal normative judgment, such as 'no distinction
*shall* be made on the basis of \...etc.'

Or consider a real historical example: the practices of the early Ache
tribe of Paraguay as described in 1972 by anthropologist Pierre Clastres
in his *Chronicle of the Guayaki Indians*. The tribe was reported by
Pierre to practice cannibalism, kill elderly people with Alzheimer
because they are thought to have harboured dangerous vengeful spirits,
have pre-pubertal sex, abandon their aged, beat menarcheal girls with
tapir penises and cut them with broken glass, and what's more, they held
'clubfights' where men would fight sometimes to the death, similar to
Roman gladiator contests. It would be rather odd to say that the human
rights project was intended to protect the 'right to culture' of the
Ache tribal men rather than protecting the menarcheal girls' 'right
above culture', viz. their right from an abusive cultural practice. The
retort by the men that such a practice is a "cultural" practice to which
they have the right to will fly in the face of the girls' rights above
such culture.

### Human Rights Advocates Should Not "Ground" Normative Universalism

As discussed earlier, human rights advocate often wish to "ground" the
normative universalism which the human rights culture is based on with
metaethical realism, that is, by saying that they are backed up by
stance-independent moral facts that apply to everyone, at all times,
everywhere and independent of any perspectives or cultures. I suggest
human rights advocates give up on metaethical moral realism for they
would otherwise be opening themselves up to accusations of smuggling in
their own social practices into something ineluctable and transcendental
that is intrinsic to all humans and then calling it 'true independent of
any stances'. I suggest that human rights advocates abandon the attempt
to "ground" universalism altogether and instead endorse a pragmatist
approach to human rights without ever eluding to the metaphysical nature
of such rights.

A better reformulation of the human rights advocates' position would
thus be the total inversion of the characterisation above, i.e., by
affirming metaethical cultural relativism (with a deflationary account
of truth) across the board accompanied by a normative universalism
(while allowing a plurality of culturally-specific values; such as, for
example, the right to own a goat or the right to die among family,
etc.):

> We hold that the cluster of moral norms we call 'human rights' are
> true and ought to be prescribed universally. We also affirm that we
> ought to not tolerate cultures and individuals that act in opposition
> to those norms.
>
> We do not wish to 'ground' the truth of the human rights norms, nor
> the subsequent normative claims on universal prescription and
> non-tolerance. Any attempt to do so will be circular.
>
> Instead, we acknowledge that human rights norms (and the subsequent
> normative claims) are true or false relative to standards. When
> indexed to our standards as human rights advocates, they are true.
> When indexed to the standards of Medieval Christians, they are mostly
> false. Yet, we are none the worse for that.

The fear often expressed when endorsing such metaethical relativism is a
common rhetorical sleight of hand which equivocates metaethical
considerations ('the truth of human rights is relative to standards')
with normative considerations ('we ought not judge cultures with
different standards'). But *metaethical* relativism does not logically
entail any *normative* consequences (the clue is in the name).
Acknowledging human rights as stance-dependent norms that are indexed to
our standards doesn't mean that we are precluded from normatively
judging practices that contravene them.

To use an analogy, we acknowledge food or music taste as being relative
to preferences but that doesn't impede our ability of having strong food
or music preferences or in judging, or even going to war against, people
with contravening preferences if we are so inclined. Remember, the
comparison between human rights and food/music is their *meta-normative*
characteristics, and specifically **NOT** how important they are or what
ought be done about them or how much they should be imposed on
others---those are all normative, not metanormative, stances. It just so
happens that a feature of music/food preferences is that they are not
typically imposed on others and people do not usually 'judge' others for
holding different music and taste preference. But, in principle, someone
can be a meta-normative anti-realist about music/taste/aesthetics etc.
*and* simultaneously hold a normative stance that their preferences
ought be imposed on everyone. This is the view I advocate for with
respect to human rights. We can be anti-realist about human rights and
simultaneously hold a normative stance that human rights are extremely
important and prefer that everyone else follows those norms.

Unfortunately, many human rights activists think that in order to be
rhetorically effective they must adopt, even if implicitly, moral
realism as a metaethical stance, in which moral sentences are 'made
true' by the intrinsic nature of the world and not by our evaluative
standards.[^1] They think that
they must insist that rules for action *really* matter only if those
rules were independent from us, in which case they will only
'psuedomatter', and that this will win them more rhetorical points among
unconvinced populations. They think that maintaining a metaethical
relativism or constructivism will make those rules arbitrary and deprive
them from their necessary 'oomph'.

Philosopher Richard Rorty
[highlights](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/objectivity-relativism-and-truth/04DFAEAC5991EC3C403C50B83C6F4086)
this psychological dilemma within liberals who use rationalist rhetoric
of the Enlightenment to justify their liberal convictions:

> These liberals hold on to the Enlightenment notion that there is
> something called a common human nature, a metaphysical substrate in
> which things called "rights" are embedded, and that this substrate
> takes moral precedence over all merely "cultural" superstructures.
> Preserving this idea produces self-referential paradox as soon as
> liberals begin to ask themselves whether their belief in such a
> substrate is itself a cultural bias. Liberals who are both
> connoisseurs of diversity and Enlightenment rationalists cannot get
> out of this bind. Their rationalism com­mits them to making sense of
> the distinction between rational judgment and cultural bias. Their
> liberalism forces them to call any doubts about human equality a
> result of such irrational bias. Yet their connoisseurship forces them
> to realize that most of the globe's inhabitants simply do not believe
> in human equality, that such a belief is a Western eccentricity. Since
> they think it would be shockingly ethnocentric to say "So what? We
> Western liberals do believe in it, and so much the better for us,"
> they are stuck.

Rorty's advice follows the line of thought I'm getting at, which is to
say 'yes, our cultural practices are not universally held nor are they
etched into the fabrics of the cosmos, but so what?' There is no
principled distinction between cultural bias and rational judgment if we
acknowledge that we cannot reach out from under our cultural practices
and institutions into a God's eye view. We cannot, in other words, shed
our frame of reference temporarily and rise up into a neutral,
omniscient point of view and then start to compare all frames of
references. The terms we fall back on are, after all, always
self-consciously ethnocentric: 'as a... Qatari'.., 'Marxist', 'Liberal',
'Muslim', 'anthropologist' I think thus and so. And so Rorty urges human
rights advocates "to take with full seriousness the fact that the ideals
of procedural justice and human equality are parochial, recent,
eccentric cultural developments, and then to recognize that this does
not mean they are any the less worth fighting for . . . \[and\] the best
hope of the species". In this construal of what Rorty calls 'liberal
ironism', Rorty is echoing the liberalism philosopher Isaiah Berlin when
he ended his famous essay *Two Concepts of Liberty* by saying that his
ideal political community is one that realises 'the relative validity of
\[its\] convictions and yet stand for them unflinchingly'.

[^1]: In technical jargon, there are antecedently existing “truth-makers” tracked by some truth-tracking faculty. Usually the truth-makers are how human beings are *qua* humans, i.e. some alleged intrinsic “human nature” that’s truth-tracked by “human reason”.
